[DRAMATIC MUSIC]
Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Narrator: SEGREGATED
MID-CENTURY AMERICA.
MISSISSIPPI ITS EPICENTER.
Official YIFY movies site:
YTS.MX
Barnett: FRIENDS. I'M A
MISSISSIPPI SEGREGATIONIST
AND I AM PROUD OF IT.
Narrator: A LAND
STEEPED IN RACIST VIOLENCE.
FROM THIS CONTEXT
EMERGES ONE MAN
WHO WOULD RISK HIS LIFE
TO FIGHT FOR HIS BELIEFS.
James Meredith: I HAD
ENGAGED IN A WAR
AGAINST THE SYSTEM
OF WHITE SUPREMACY.
Williams: THERE WAS NO GUARANTEEIN SEPTEMBER OF '62
THAT MEREDITH WAS GONNA
COME OUT OF THIS ALIVE.
Narrator: TO
ACHIEVE HIS ENDS.
HE WILL TRIGGER THE LARGEST
DOMESTIC MOBILIZATION
OF U.S. TROOPS
SINCE THE CIVIL WAR.
Reporter: THE
SITUATION IS BAD.
THE MARSHALS ARE STILL
FIRING TEARGAS SHELLS
AND EXPLODING ALL
OVER THE PLACE.
Schieffer: I STARTED HEARINGTHUDS AGAINST
THE SIDE OF THE TRUCK
AND IT TURNED OUT THAT THEY WERE
THROWING ROCKS.
MOLOTOV COCKTAILS.
Narrator: A
LARGELY FORGOTTEN HERO
WHO SINGLE HANDEDLY INSTIGATES
SOME OF THE MOST
SIGNIFICANT VICTORIES
OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
YET HE IS A COMPLEX MAN.
James Meredith: IT HAD ALWAYS
BEEN MY BELIEF THAT MY JOB
WAS TO RESTRUCTURE THE WORLD.
BECAUSE I DIDN'T LIKE NOTHING.
INCLUDING MOST OF THE TIME.
I DIDN'T LIKE JAMES MEREDITH.
Judy Meredith: WHAT I
THOUGHT ABOUT WAS
"WHAT A BRAVE MAN. OR
EITHER HE'S CRAZY AS HECK".
Narrator: A CIVIL RIGHTS
ICON WHO REJECTS THE TERM.
James Meredith: CIVIL RIGHTS IS
AN INSULT TO CITIZENSHIP.
EVERY CITIZEN IN
THE UNITED STATES
IS ENTITLED TO EVERY
ONE OF THOSE RIGHTS.
Narrator: THROUGHOUT IT ALL.
HE MARCHES TO THE
BEAT OF HIS OWN DRUM.
SOMETIMES CONTROVERSIAL.
Wright: HE'S A LONER. HE DOESN'TCARE WHAT PEOPLE SAY ABOUT HIM.
James Meredith: I ALWAYS THOUGHT
THAT MY JOB WAS
TO LEAD THE PEOPLE TO EQUALITY.
Narrator: THIS IS THE
STORY OF JAMES MEREDITH.
AN AMERICAN ORIGINAL.
Williams: THE WORD THAT
IMMEDIATELY COMES TO
MIND IS REBEL.
Judy Meredith: IT TOOK ME ABOUT
20 YEARS TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE HECK JAMES WAS
TALKING ABOUT MOST TIMES.
Doyle: HE MAKES YOU THINK.
HE MAKES YOU SCRAMBLE
YOUR ASSUMPTIONS
WHEN IT COMES TO
AMERICAN HISTORY
AND WHEN IT COMES TO RACE.
Narrator: HE WAS BORN
IN KOSCIUSKO. MISSISSIPPI.
THE FAMILY FARM IS PIVOTAL
IN SHAPING HIS OUTLOOK.
James Meredith: MY FATHER WAS
GOING TO SELL THE FARM
AND HE WANTED TO GIVE ME
FIRST CHANCE TO BUY IT.
THERE WAS REALLY
NOTHING TO CONSIDER.
UNLIKE WHICH IS
GENERALLY THOUGHT.
I WAS BORN IN PRIVILEGE.
MY FAMILY OWNED LOTS OF LAND.
I WAS BORN IN 1933 IN THE HEART
OF THE AMERICAN DEPRESSION.
BUT WE DIDN'T LIVE
LIKE POOR PEOPLE.
Hazel Meredith: BECAUSE OF
THE WAY WE GREW UP.
WE DIDN'T GROW UP
THINKING WE WERE INFERIOR
TO ANYBODY OR ANYTHING.
Narrator: ACROSS THE SOUTH.
WHITE SUPREMACY KEPT MOST
BLACKS DISENFRANCHISED.
NOWHERE IS SEGREGATION
MORE BRUTALLY
ENFORCED THAN IN MISSISSIPPI.
James Meredith: YOU SEE. THE
OTHER THING THAT WAS SIGNIFICANT
ABOUT MY GROWING UP
WAS THE ISOLATION.
I SPENT MOST OF MY
TIME JUST ROAMING
MY FATHER'S 84-ACRE
FARM. TOTALLY BY MYSELF.
AS A MATTER OF FACT.
I WAS 15 YEARS OLD
BEFORE I KNEW THAT
BLACK WAS SUPPOSED
TO BE AT THE BOTTOM
END OF THE DEAL.
WE VISITED OUR
RELATIVES IN DETROIT.
AND WE CAME BACK ON THE TRAIN.
AND WHEN WE GOT TO
MEMPHIS. TENNESSEE.
THE CONDUCTOR TOLD
ME AND MY BROTHER
WE HAD TO MOVE TO THE BLACK CAR.
AND I HAD TO STAND ALL THE WAY
FROM MEMPHIS TO
DURANT. MISSISSIPPI
AND I CRIED ALL THE WAY.
AND I PROMISED GOD
THAT I WAS GONNA SPEND
THE REST OF MY LIFE
TRYING TO CHANGE THAT.
Doyle: HE HAD BEEN
RAISED BY A FATHER
WHO WAS LIKE A
BIBLICAL CHARACTER
OF STRENGTH AND BRILLIANCE
AND THAT FATHER SAID
TO JAMES MEREDITH.
"YOU ARE THE CHOSEN ONE. YOU
ARE GONNA CHANGE HISTORY".
Narrator: IN 1950.
MEREDITH ENLISTS
IN THE NEWLY
INTEGRATED AIR FORCE.
AS JAMES SERVES. THE
FIGHT FOR BLACK EQUALITY
IS HEATING UP AND EDUCATION
IS THE PRIMARY BATTLEGROUND.
IN 1957. NINE BLACK
STUDENTS ATTEMPTED TO ENROLL
IN THE CENTRAL HIGH SCHOOL
IN LITTLE ROCK. ARKANSAS.
PRESIDENT EISENHOWER. UNDER
PRESSURE FROM THE NAACP.
MOBILIZES FEDERAL
TROOPS TO ENFORCE
THEIR RIGHT TO
ATTEND THE SCHOOL.
JAMES NOW STATIONED IN JAPAN.
FOLLOWS THE STORY
CLOSELY AND WITH INTEREST.
Doyle: HE SAW WHAT HAPPENED
IN LITTLE ROCK IN 1957
AND THAT WAS AMERICAN
COMBAT TROOPS
DELIVERING JUSTICE FOR
AMERICAN SCHOOL CHILDREN.
Narrator: WHEN MEREDITH LEAVES
THE RAPIDLY INTEGRATING
WORLD OF THE MILITARY.
HE RETURNES TO A MISSISSIPPI
STILL MIRED IN INEQUALITY.
HE MAKES A DECISION THAT
WOULD CHANGE HISTORY.
James Meredith: I CAME BACK WITH
THE PLAN TO FORCE
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
INTO A POSITION
WHERE THEY HAD TO USE
THE MILITARY MIGHT
TO SUPPORT MY RIGHTS
OF CITIZENSHIP.
Narrator: NO BLACK
STUDENT HAD ATTENDED
THE UNIVERSITY OF MISSISSIPPI
IN ITS 113 YEAR HISTORY.
Reporter: JAMES.
WHY DO YOU WANT TO ENTER
THE UNIVERSITY
OF MISSISSIPPI?
James Meredith: I THINK THAT
EVERY CITIZEN SHOULD HAVE
AN OPPORTUNITY TO RECEIVE
EDUCATION IN HIS OWN STATE.
Jackson: HE TOOK THE SYSTEM ON.
HE TOOK IT ON.
WHEN YOU THINK OF THAT. ITHINK ABOUT A GUY WHO WAS BOLD.
COURAGEOUS. SMART. MARCHED
TO THE BEAT OF HIS OWN DRUM.
Gilliam: THE UNIVERSITY
OF MISSISSIPPI.
IT WAS THE SYMBOL
OF WHITE SUPREMACY.
THE THOUGHT AT THAT
POINT OF A BLACK PERSON
ENROLLING AND
ATTENDING THAT SCHOOL
WAS BEYOND THE IMAGINATION
OF SO MANY PEOPLE.
Narrator: JAMES
SAW AN OPPORTUNITY
IN RECENTLY ELECTED
PRESIDENT JOHN KENNEDY.
James Meredith: JOHN KENNEDY WAS
A SENATOR FROM MASSACHUSETTS
THAT HAD NEVER EVEN THOUGHT
ABOUT THE BLACK ISSUE.
BUT HE KNEW THE POLITICAL
POWER OF THE BLACK WHITE ISSUE.
THE DAY HE GOT
INAUGURATED. THE NEXT DAY.
I DROPPED MY LETTER IN THE MAIL.
Narrator: OLE MISS SENDS
AN ENCOURAGING RESPONSE
AND JAMES REPLIES.
James Meredith: I'M VERY
PLEASED WITH YOUR LETTER
THAT YOU RECENTLY SENT TO ME.
I SINCERELY HOPE
THAT YOUR ATTITUDE
TOWARD ME DOES NOT CHANGE
UPON LEARNING THAT I AM
NOT A WHITE APPLICANT.
Narrator: WITHIN
DAYS OLE MISS RESPONDS.
JAMES WILL NOT BE
ALLOWED TO REGISTER.
HE KNOWS HIS CAMPAIGN WOULD
END UP IN THE COURTS.
FOR THAT HE WILL
NEED LEGAL SUPPORT.
James Meredith: IT WAS MEDGAR
EVERS THAT FIRST SUGGESTED
THAT I CONTACT THE NAACP
OF WHICH HE WAS THE TOP PERSON
IN THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI.
HE PUT ME IN TOUCH WITH THE
NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE FUND.
Narrator: IN 1954. THE
LEGAL DEFENSE FUND HAD WON
THE CASE OF BROWN VERSUS
BOARD OF EDUCATION
WHICH EXPLICITLY OUTLAWED
RACIAL SEGREGATION
IN PUBLIC EDUCATION.
FOR 16 MONTHS ATTORNEY
CONSTANCE BAKER MOTLEY
PUSHES MEREDITH'S CASE.
IN SEPTEMBER 1962.
THE SUPREME COURT
RULES THAT OLE MISS
MUST ADMIT JAMES MEREDITH.
James Meredith: I HAD
ENGAGED IN A WAR AGAINST
THE ORGANIZED POWER OF
THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI.
Narrator: AND
MEREDITH'S WAR IS ABOUT
TO ENTER A NEW. FAR
MORE DANGEROUS PHASE.
Angry Student: GO HOME NIGGER.
GO HOME NIGGER!
Narrator: SEPTEMBER 1962.
THE UNIVERSITY OF MISSISSIPPI
IS ON HIGH ALERT.
JAMES MEREDITH HAS CHOSEN
TO FIGHT HIS BATTLE
FOR BLACK EQUALITY BY
CHALLENGING OLE MISS
TO ENROLL HIM AS IT'S FIRST
AFRICAN AMERICAN STUDENT.
BUT THE FORCES OPPOSING HIM
STRETCHED FAR BEYOND THE
UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION.
ALL THE WAY TO THE STATE'S
GOVERNOR. ROSS BARNETT.
Barnett Jr.: MY FATHER WAS BORNWAY OUT IN THE COUNTRY
IN CENTRAL MISSISSIPPI. 1898.
HE WAS BORN. AS HE SAID.
60 MILES FROM A RAILROAD
AND 60 MILES FROM A BANK.
THEN HE WENT TO LAW
SCHOOL AT OLE MISS.
MY FATHER LIKED BLACK FOLKS.
BUT HE BELIEVED THAT THE
LORD MADE WHITE FOLKS.
BLACK FOLKS. YELLOW FOLKS.
RED FOLKS. WHATEVER.
AND THAT WAS AN
INTENTION OF THE LORD.
Narrator: AND BARNETT
HAD RUN FOR GOVERNOR
ON AN EXPLICITLY
RACIST PLATFORM.
Barnett: FRIENDS. I'M A
MISSISSIPPI SEGREGATIONIST
AND I AM PROUD OF IT.
Doyle: ROSS BARNETT WAS AFRAID
OF BEING KILLED POLITICALLY
THE MOMENT THAT THE SUN ROSE
ON THE DAY THAT
MEREDITH GOES TO SCHOOL.
HE WAS DESPERATELY TRYING
TO SALVAGE HIS OWN CAREER.
Narrator: DAYS
AFTER THE SUPREME COURT
DECISION IN MEREDITH'S FAVOR.
BARNETT DRAWS A LINE
IN THE SAND.
Barnett: I HAVE SAID IN EVERY
COUNTY IN MISSISSIPPI
THAT NO SCHOOL IN OUR STATE WILL
BE INTEGRATED WHILE
I AM YOUR GOVERNOR.
Narrator: THE
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI
IS NOW IN OPEN REBELLION
AGAINST THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
BOTH SIDES KNOW THE FACE
OFF COULD LEAD TO BLOODSHED
AND AT THE MIDDLE OF IT
ALL IS JAMES MEREDITH.
Williams: I THINK THERE
WERE THOSE WITHIN
THE CIVIL RIGHTS
COMMUNITY WHO UNDERSTOOD
HOW SIGNIFICANT THIS MOMENT WAS.
I THINK THERE WERE
OTHERS WHO UNDERSTOOD
HOW DANGEROUS THIS
UNDERTAKING WAS.
THERE WAS NO GUARANTEE
IN SEPTEMBER OF '62
THAT MEREDITH WAS GONNA
COME OUT OF THIS ALIVE.
James Meredith: I EXPECTED
TO BE KILLED.
Narrator: ON
SEPTEMBER THE 20TH.
MEREDITH ARRIVED AT OLE MISS.
James Meredith: ALL THE
STUDENTS WERE OUT THERE.
THEY WERE CUSSING
AND ALL OF THAT.
James Meredith: FIRST. HE ASKED
WHICH ONE IS JAMES MEREDITH
AND I WAS THE ONLY BLACK
ANYWHERE ON THE CAMPUS.
Narrator: BARNETT
REFUSES TO ADMIT MEREDITH.
Barnett Jr.: HE WAS DOING
EVERYTHING HE COULD LEGALLY
AND SOME MAY SAY ILLEGALLY TO
KEEP MEREDITH OUT OF OLE MISS.
Narrator: MEREDITH'S
LEGAL TEAM OBTAINS
A COURT ORDER
PROHIBITING BARNETT
FROM BLOCKING MEREDITH'S
ATTEMPT TO REGISTER.
Reporter: MISS MOTLEY.
WHAT'S GONNA BE THE
PROCEDURE FOR TOMORROW?
Motley: WELL. MR MEREDITH
IS GONNA GO OVER
TO JACKSON AND REGISTER.
Reporter: DO YOU EXPECT
THAT THE BOARD WILL COMPLY?
Motley: THEY TOLD THE
COURT THEY WOULD.
Reporter: DO YOU ANTICIPATE ANY
DIFFICULTIES TOMORROW?
Motley: NO. I DON'T.
Narrator: ON SEPTEMBER 25TH.
MEREDITH TRIES AGAIN.
THIS TIME AT THE STATE
OFFICE IN JACKSON.
Reporter: JAMES
MEREDITH HAS JUST ARRIVED
IN THE CUSTODY OF
FEDERAL OFFICIALS.
AND APPARENTLY MAKING HIS WAY UP
TO THE 10TH FLOOR TO REGISTER.
Reporter: HERE HE COMES NOW.
PATROL ASKING US ALL TO BACK UP
Officer: JUST BACK
UP. EVERYBODY PLEASE.
Barnett: TO JAMES H. MEREDITH.
APPLICANT FOR
ADMISSION AS A STUDENT
AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MISSISSIPPI.
I. ROSS R. BARNETT.
GOVERNOR OF THE GREAT AND
SOVEREIGN STATE OF MISSISSIPPI.
INTERPOSE THE SOVEREIGNTY
OF THIS STATE AND DO HEREBY.
NOW AND FINALLY
DENY YOU ADMISSION
TO THE UNIVERSITY
OF MISSISSIPPI.
Doyle: AGAIN HE HAS TO ENDURE
THIS RIDICULOUS DANCE
WHERE THE STATE SAYS. "NO. WE'RE
NOT GOING TO REGISTER YOU."
Narrator: PRESIDENT KENNEDY
ATTEMPTS TO REASON WITH BARNETT.
Narrator: WHILE
BARNETT STALLS.
WHITE SUPREMACISTS
POUR INTO OXFORD.
Reporter: YOU MUST BE
AWARE THAT YOUR VERY LIFE
MAY BE AT STAKE WHEN YOU
WALK ON TO THAT CAMPUS?
James Meredith: WELL. EVERYONE'S
LIFE IS AT STAKE AT ALL TIMES.
Narrator: PRESIDENT
KENNEDY CANNOT
ALLOW BARNETT TO DEFY
THE SUPREME COURT.
Narrator: THAT WEEKEND. AS
KENNEDY PONDERS HIS OPTIONS.
BARNETT JOINS THOUSANDS
OF OLE MISS STUDENTS
AT A FOOTBALL GAME
AGAINST KENTUCKY.
STANDING AT THE 50-YARD
LINE AT HALF TIME.
BARNETT REMAINS DEFIANT.
Barnett: I LOVE MISSISSIPPI.
I LOVE HER PEOPLE.
I LOVE AND I RESPECT
OUR HERITAGE.
Narrator: THE NEXT DAY.
THOUSANDS OF US TROOPS MOBILIZE
FOR A SHOWDOWN IN OXFORD.
James Meredith: THAT WAS
MY ONLY CONCERN
WAS WHAT THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY WAS GONNA DO.
AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES AND HIS ADVISORS
WERE THE ONLY PEOPLE
THAT DETERMINED THAT.
AND THOSE WERE THE ONLY
PEOPLE I EVEN THOUGHT ABOUT.
Narrator: MEREDITH'S
CONFRONTATION WITH BARNETT
HAS BECOME A
CONSTITUTIONAL CRISIS
AND IT IS ABOUT TO
ESCALATE FURTHER.
Narrator: BY SUNDAY.
SEPTEMBER THE 30TH 1962.
JAMES MEREDITH'S ONE MAN
CAMPAIGN TO INTEGRATE OLE MISS
HAS DRAWN THOUSANDS OF WHITE
SUPREMACISTS TO CAMPUS.
Reporter: SEVERAL
HUNDRED FEDERAL MARSHALS
FLY INTO OXFORD ARMED WITH
TEAR GAS AND SIDEARMS.
Narrator: THE MARSHALS
TAKE UP POSITIONS
IN FRONT OF THE LYCEUM BUILDING.
WHERE MEREDITH WILL TRY TO
REGISTER THE NEXT MORNING.
Wilkie: I DREW THIS THE
DAY AFTER THE RIOT.
IT ACCOMPANIED ABOUT A 10-PAGE
LETTER I SENT MY MOTHER
WHO HAD GRADUATED
FROM OLD MISS IN 1931.
A CROWD OF STUDENTS
GATHERED IN THE AREA.
THE CIRCLE RIGHT IN FRONT
OF THE LYCEUM BUILDING.
I'D SAY THERE WERE
500 OF US THERE.
IT WAS LARGELY A CURIOUS CROWD.
Schieffer: I HAD JUST GOTTEN OUT
OF THE U.S. AIR FORCE.
AND I WENT BACK TO WORK AT THIS
LITTLE RADIO STATION
IN FORT WORTH
AND THE STATION SENT ME DOWN
TO OLE MISS TO COVER THIS STORY.
I DROVE ALL NIGHT. GOT INTO
OXFORD ON SUNDAY AFTERNOON
AND ALREADY THERE WERE CROWDS
FORMING ON THE STREETS.
I STARTED HEARING THUDS
AGAINST THE SIDE OF THE TRUCK
AND IT TURNED OUT THAT THEY WERE
THROWING ROCKS AND BEER BOTTLES.
Wilkie: IT BEGAN TO GET
A LITTLE BIT UGLY.
THERE WERE A FEW STUDENTS WHO
WERE PROVOKING THE SITUATION.
TAUNTING THE MARSHALS.
THROWING ROCKS.
Schieffer: THE HIGHWAY PATROL
WHO HAD BEEN THERE.
SUDDENLY LEFT.
Wilkie: OUTSIDERS WHO
HAD NOT BEEN ABLE
TO GET ONTO THE CAMPUS SUDDENLY
CAME POURING INTO THE
CAMPUS WITH THEIR GUNS
TO DEFEND THE SOVEREIGNTY
OF MISSISSIPPI
OR WHATEVER THEY
CLAIMED THEY WERE DOING.
Narrator: THAT EVENING.
AS CHAOS CONTINUES ON CAMPUS.
KENNEDY ATTEMPTS TO
CALM THE SITUATION.
Kennedy: AMERICANS ARE FREE AND
SURE TO DISAGREE WITH THE LAW.
BUT NOT TO DISOBEY IT.
Barnett: EVERY PUBLIC OFFICIAL.
INCLUDING MYSELF.
SHOULD BE PREPARED TO
MAKE THE CHOICE TONIGHT
WHETHER HE WILL SUBMIT
OR WHETHER HE IS
WILLING TO GO TO JAIL.
Schieffer: AS DARK CAME ON.
THEY STARTED THROWING MOLOTOV
COCKTAILS AT THE MARSHALS
AND THE MARSHALS WOULD
THEN COUNTER WITH TEAR GAS.
Reporter: CHUCK.
THE SITUATION IS BAD.
THE MARSHALS ARE STILL
FIRING TEARGAS SHELLS
AND EXPLODING ALL
OVER THE PLACE.
Meek: THAT WENT ON ALL
NIGHT. TEAR GAS. BULLETS.
SO OPPRESSIVE. THE ONLY WAY
WE STAYED THE WHOLE NIGHT
IS TO GET ON OUR BELLIES
AND IF YOU GOT DOWN REAL LOW.
THE TEAR GAS WOULD BE ABOVE
AND YOU COULD STAY DOWN THERE.
Schieffer: AND THEN THE WORST
THING HAD HAPPENED.
WE HEARD GUNSHOTS AND
REALIZED THERE WAS A SNIPER
OR AT LEAST ONE
SNIPER. MAYBE TWO.
WHO WERE UP ON THE ROOF
OF ONE OF THE DORMS
AND THEY WERE SHOOTING
DOWN INTO THE CROWD.
YOU DIDN'T KNOW WHO THEY
WERE GOING TO SHOOT AT.
YOU DIDN'T KNOW WHERE
THOSE BULLETS WERE GOING.
Gilliam: ONE OF THE PEOPLE THEYHATED MOST WERE JOURNALISTS
WHO WERE COMING BACK AND TELLING
THE OUTSIDE WORLD
WHAT THINGS WERE LIKE.
AND AS A BLACK REPORTER.
THERE WOULD BE NO WAY THAT
I COULD'VE GOTTEN ON CAMPUS
BECAUSE IT WAS
JUST TOO DANGEROUS.
Narrator: AS
VIOLENCE ESCALATES.
FEDERAL MARSHALS ESCORT MEREDITH
TO A CAMPUS DORM
UNDER HEAVY SECURITY.
IN A FRANTIC BID TO
CONTROL THE SITUATION.
PRESIDENT KENNEDY PERSONALLY
CALLS GOVERNOR BARNETT.
Williams: THERE IS A DEGREE OF
THEATER IN THE NEGOTIATIONS
THAT ARE TAKING PLACE BETWEEN
GOVERNOR BARNETT AND THE
KENNEDY ADMINISTRATION.
AND PART OF THAT
POLITICAL THEATER
IS PREDICATED ON THE
DESIRE OF BOTH CAMPS
TO NOT TO LOSE VOTERS.
Narrator: THE NEXT MORNING.
FEDERAL TROOPS BEGIN
TO ENTER OXFORD.
Doyle: THE 101ST
AIRBORNE DIVISION
WAS DROPPED INTO
OXFORD. MISSISSIPPI
THE MORNING OF THE RIOT.
YOU HAD THE 82ND
AIRBORNE DIVISION.
YOU HAD THE 2ND
INFANTRY DIVISION.
YOU HAD THE 503RD
MILITARY POLICE BATTALION.
AND THE 716TH MILITARY
POLICE BATTALION
RUSHING IN TO TRY
TO SAVE MEREDITH.
SAVE THE TOWN. AND
SAVE THE PEOPLE.
THE CITY OF OXFORD FROM
BEING BURNED DOWN BASICALLY.
Meek: THERE WERE A LINE OF
JEEPS THAT WERE 12-WIDE
ALL THE WAY OVER THE
FIELDS TO THE HIGHWAY.
WHICH WAS A LONG WAY.
THEY HAD TAKEN THIS
COMMUNITY AND LOCKED IT DOWN.
Doyle: THIS IS THE STORY
OF A 29 YEAR-OLD
BLACK AMERICAN MILITARY VETERAN
MANIPULATING THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.
THE SUPREME COURT OF
THE UNITED STATES.
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI
INTO A CRISIS THAT IN THE END
OPENED THE GATES OF HIGHER
EDUCATION FOR ALL AMERICANS.
WHICH IS A SPECTACULAR
ACHIEVEMENT.
Narrator: BY THE TIME
TROOPS RESTORED ORDER.
300 PEOPLE HAD BEEN ARRESTED.
MORE THAN 200
PEOPLE WERE INJURED.
INCLUDING 30 GUNSHOT
WOUNDS TO FEDERAL MARSHALS.
TWO CIVILIANS WERE KILLED.
INCLUDING A JOURNALIST.
Schieffer: THE REPORTER
WHO WAS KILLED
WAS FOR AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE.
HE HAD BEEN SENT THERE BECAUSE
SOMEBODY IN HIS OFFICE.
IT WAS THEIR DAY OFF.
Wickham: RAY GUNTER WAS A YOUNG
MAN FROM ABBEVILLE. MISSISSIPPI.
AND HE CAME DOWN TO SEE
WHAT ALL THE FUSS WAS ABOUT.
HE WAS A LOCAL GUY WHO WAS
IN THE WRONG PLACE
AT THE WRONG TIME.
Narrator: THAT SAME MORNING
IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE RIOT.
MEREDITH BEGINS HIS FIRST DAY
AS A STUDENT AT OLE MISS.
Meek: I COULD NEVER FORGET
SEEING JAMES STEP OUT THAT DORM
AND I THOUGHT AT THE TIME.
"GOLLY. WHAT A BRAVE MAN."
BECAUSE. HELL. I WAS SCARED.
AND I WAS ON THE OTHER SIDE.
BUT HE WAS STRONG. STEADFAST.
AND MADE HIS WAY. AND
HE WAS DETERMINED.
Reporter: SIR.
THERE'S BEEN A GREAT DEAL
OF TURMOIL AND CONFLICT.
TWO PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED.
DO YOU HAVE ANY
FEELINGS OF GUILT.
HAVE YOU GIVEN IT
ANY SECOND THOUGHTS?
James Meredith: I'M VERY
SORRY THAT ANYONE
HAD TO GET HURT OR KILLED.
BUT. OF COURSE. I DON'T
BELIEVE ANY OF YOU BELIEVE
THAT I HAD ANYTHING
TO DO WITH THAT.
Narrator: JAMES
HAD WON THE BATTLE.
IT HAS TAKEN 16 MONTHS
AND THE LARGEST MOBILIZATION
OF FEDERAL TROOPS
ON U.S. SOIL SINCE
THE CIVIL WAR.
James Meredith: I FELT THAT
I HAD ACCOMPLISHED
A SMALL PART OF MY MISSION.
Narrator: OLE MISS
IS NO LONGER SEGREGATED.
James Meredith: AT NINE. I
ATTENDED MY FIRST CLASS.
IT WAS A COURSE IN
COLONIAL AMERICAN HISTORY.
I WAS A FEW MINUTES LATE
AND WAS GIVEN A SEAT AT
THE BACK OF THE ROOM.
I REMEMBER A GIRL. THE
ONLY GIRL THERE I THINK.
AND SHE WAS CRYING.
BUT IT MIGHT HAVE BEEN FROM
THE TEARGAS IN THE ROOM.
I WAS CRYING FROM IT MYSELF.
Meek: I THOUGHT.
"GOSH. SOMEBODY.
"I GOTTA GET A PICTURE
OF HIM IN THE CLASSROOM."
SO. I TOOK A NIKON. AND
I PUT ON MY TRENCH COAT.
AND WHEN JAMES WENT IN
THE FIRST CLASSROOM.
I JUST SNAPPED AS BEST I COULD.
AND THE CLASS BEGAN TO EMPTY.
INCLUDING THE INSTRUCTOR
AND THERE WAS JAMES BY HIMSELF
AND THAT WAS A POWERFUL MOMENT.
Narrator: MEREDITH
EMBARKS ON HIS STUDIES.
SPURNED BY THE VAST MAJORITY
OF HIS FELLOW STUDENTS.
BUT THE THREAT OF
VIOLENCE IS EVER PRESENT.
Narrator: SOON AFTER MEREDITH
BEGINS HIS SECOND SEMESTER.
MEREDITH'S CLOSE FRIEND
MEDGAR EVERS IS MURDERED.
SHOT IN THE BACK IN THE
DRIVEWAY OF HIS HOME.
Evers: I'VE HAD A
NUMBER OF THREATENING CALLS.
PEOPLE CALLING ME SAYING
THAT THEY WERE GONNA KILL ME.
SAYING THEY WERE
GONNA BLOW MY HOME UP
AND SAYING THAT I ONLY
HAD A FEW HOURS TO LIVE.
I SAID "WELL. WHENEVER
MY TIME COMES I'M READY".
Narrator: JUST
A FEW MONTHS LATER.
JAMES REACHES THE GOAL
THAT MEDGAR EVERS
HELPED HIM TO REALIZE.
University Dean:
JAMES HOWARD MEREDITH.
Narrator: TODAY.
NEARLY 60 YEARS LATER.
ONE IN 10 STUDENTS AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MISSISSIPPI
IS AFRICAN AMERICAN.
Student: CAN I
SHAKE YOUR HAND?
James Meredith: I'M GLAD
TO SEE YOU HERE.
Narrator: WHILE
INTEGRATING OLE MISS
IS A LANDMARK VICTORY.
FOR JAMES THE BATLLE
WASN'T OVER.
James Meredith: THE
CONCEPT OF CIVIL RIGHTS
IS THAT WE GOOD WHITE FOLKS
WILL HELP YOU GET
SOME OF YOUR RIGHTS.
THREE OR FOUR OF THEM.
IF YOU ACKNOWLEDGE THAT YOU
DON'T HAVE ALL THE RIGHTS WE DO.
Doyle: HE ALWAYS THOUGHT THAT
THE TRADITIONAL VOCABULARY
AND IMAGERY OF THE AMERICAN
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT
WAS SOMEHOW INDICATED WEAKNESS
OR INFERIORITY OR SUPPLICATION.
James Meredith: CIVIL RIGHTS IS
AN INSULT TO CITIZENSHIP.
EVERY CITIZEN IN
THE UNITED STATES
IS ENTITLED TO EVERY
ONE OF THOSE RIGHTS.
Judy Meredith: HIS THING WAS.
"IF YOU GIVE ME SOME
CIVIL RIGHTS.
"WHAT ABOUT THE REST OF THE
RIGHTS I'M SUPPOSED TO HAVE?"
James Meredith: THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF VIOLENCE
IS EVEN MORE USED
THAN ACTUAL VIOLENCE.
Williams: FOR MEREDITH. IT WAS
THIS OVERWHELMING FEAR
THAT HE UNDERSTOOD MOST BLACKS
STILL EXPERIENCE
IN THE DEEP SOUTH
WHEN JUST TRYING TO
EXERCISE BASIC CIVIL RIGHTS.
EVEN SOMETHING AS A SIMPLE
AS GETTING A HAMBURGER
IN A RESTAURANT.
AND GOD FORBID. TRYING TO
GO TO REGISTER TO VOTE.
James Meredith: YOU UNDERSTAND.
LYNCHING HAD BEEN
A KEY FACTOR OF THE FEAR.
BUT IT WAS ALMOST
FINISHED IN THE '60S.
BUT THE FEAR WAS STILL THERE.
Narrator: BY 1966.
JUST FIVE PERCENT
OF BLACKS IN MISSISSIPPI
ARE REGISTERED TO VOTE.
ASSERTING THEIR RIGHT COULD
BE A DANGEROUS UNDERTAKING.
MEREDITH. DETERMINED
TO DRAW ATTENTION
TO THE FEAR THAT BLACK
PEOPLE EXPERIENCED.
EMBARKS ON HIS NEXT GREAT
MISSION. A WALK AGAINST FEAR.
Reporter: JAMES MEREDITH.
A VETERAN NEGRO LEADER
SET OFF ON FOOT FROM
MEMPHIS. TENNESSEE
TO JACKSON. MISSISSIPPI. TO
CONQUER FEAR. MEREDITH SAID.
Narrator: HE AIMES
TO WALK 220 MILES.
ENCOURAGING BLACKS TO
REGISTER AS HE GOES.
James Meredith: I CALL IT MY
SECOND ASSAULT ON MISSISSIPPI.
Narrator: THE MARCHES FROM
SELMA TO MONTGOMERY. ALABAMA
THE PREVIOUS YEAR
HAD ENCOURAGED THIS
FORM OF PROTEST.
BUT TRUE TO CHARACTER.
MEREDITH HAS SOMETHING
DIFFERENT IN MIND.
HE'D WALK BY HIMSELF.
Wright: HE HAD INFORMED OTHER
LEADERS OF OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
WHAT HE WAS GOING TO DO.
AND SOME OF THEM SCOFFED AT
HIM. SOME LAUGHED AT HIM.
NOW SOME OF THEM SAID. "OH.
MAN. YOU KNOW YOU CAN'T DO THAT.
YOU'RE NOT GONNA LIVE.
YOU KNOW. THEY'RE
GONNA KILL YOU
IF THEY SEE A BLACK MAN
WALKING DOWN AN INTERSTATE."
James Meredith: WHEN I TOLD THEM
I WAS GONNA DO. THEY LAUGHED.
THEY SAID GO HEAD HOME. DIRT
FARMER BLACK FROM MISSISSIPPI
WITH YOUR IGNORANT SELF.
AND YOU KNOW. I SAID OKAY.
YOU'RE ALL SO SMART
AND I'M SO DUMB.
WE'RE GONNA SEE WHAT HAPPENS.
Wright: HE DOESN'T NEED ANYONE'S
PERMISSION TO DO IT.
WHETHER THEY AGREE
WITH HIM OR NOT.
IT DOESN'T MATTER TO HIM
BECAUSE HE'S ON A MISSION
AND HE KNOWS THAT
HE'S ON A MISSION.
Williams: MEREDITH HAD
NEVER CONCEIVED
OF THIS AS A MARCH
OR DEMONSTRATION.
HE MADE THIS SHARP DISTINCTION
BETWEEN DEMONSTRATIONS AND
MARCHES AND WHAT HE WAS DOING.
AND HE BASICALLY SAID
THIS WALK AGAINST FEAR
WAS TO RECLAIM A
RIGHT THAT EVERY
AMERICAN SHOULD BE ENTITLED TO.
IT WAS ABOUT RECLAIMING
FOR BLACKS IN MISSISSIPPI.
AND IN FACT. IN AMERICA.
THIS SENSE OF BEING ENTITLED TO.
JUST THE BASIC ACCOUTREMENTS
OF CITIZENSHIP.
Narrator: AS MEREDITH
HAD BEEN AT OLE MISS.
HE IS ONE MAN. ALONE.
SEEKING TO CHANGE THE WORLD.
Doyle: IT WAS JAMES MEREDITH.
IN A PITH HELMET WITH A
FEW DOLLARS IN HIS POCKET
AND A CANE. SAID. "WE'RE
GONNA DEMONSTRATE OUR COURAGE
AND THE WORKERS
AND THE CITIZENS
OF EVERY TOWN WE GO THROUGH.
I'M GONNA ASK THEM TO
GO REGISTER TO VOTE."
NOW. REGISTERING TO VOTE.
EVEN IN 1966 IN MISSISSIPPI.
COULD GET YOU. AS A BLACK
MAN OR A WOMAN. KILLED.
Narrator: ON THE SECOND DAY.
HE CROSSES THE STATE
LINE FROM TENNESSEE.
THE EYES OF MISSISSIPPI
ARE NOW UPON HIM.
James Meredith: ABOUT THE
TOP OF THE HILL.
SOMEBODY CAME UP AND TOLD ME
THERE'S A MAN DOWN THERE WAITING
SAYS HE'S GONNA SHOOT YOU.
I SHOOK IT OFF.
I'D HAD MANY THREATS
IN MY LIFETIME.
IT DIDN'T BOTHER ME AT ALL.
AND I GOT DOWN HERE AND
I HEARD SOMEBODY SAY.
"JAMES MEREDITH.
EVERYBODY ELSE.
GET OUT OF THE WAY.
I ONLY WANT JAMES MEREDITH."
AND THEN A MAN HAD COME UP OUT
OF ONE OF THESE
DITCHES OVER THERE
AND HE SHOT ME TWO TIMES.
I'M HIT IN THE LEG I
KNOW AND IN THE HEAD.
AIN'T NOBODY GOING
TO GET ME IN THE CAR?
Man: HERE IT COMES RIGHT NOW.
HERE IT IS.
Reporter: POLICE FIND A MAN
WITH A SHOTGUN
HIDING IN THE BUSHES.
James Meredith: THE ONLY THING
SIGNIFICANT TO ME AT THAT POINT.
HE DIDN'T KILL ME.
Reporter: AND NO ONE ASKS HIM
FOR AN EXPLANATION AND
NONE SEEMS REQUIRED.
James Meredith: NOW. FRANKLY. I
DID NOT PLAN TO GET SHOT.
BUT AFTER I GOT SHOT. EVERYTHING
I HAD HOPED FOR HAPPENED.
Narrator: THE DAY
AFTER MEREDITH IS SHOT.
LEADERS FLY INTO
MEMPHIS FROM ALL FIVE
OF THE NATION'S MAJOR
CIVIL RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS.
THE SO CALLED BIG FIVE
HAVE ARRIVED IN TOWN.
THE MOVEMENT HAS
BEEN SPLINTERING
WITH SOME PUSHING TO
TURN UP HEAT ON TACTICS.
Malcolm X: THE DAY
OF THE SIT-IN.
THE LIE-IN. THE CRAWL-IN.
THE CRY-IN AND THE
BEG-IN IS OUTDATED.
Narrator: AND THEY DID
NOT AGREE ON THE NEXT STEPS
Williams: DR. KING DOES NOT WANT
TO REPUDIATE ANY GROUP.
BUT HE IS PUT IN AN
UNCOMFORTABLE POSITION
BY FLOYD MCKISSICK.
AND STOKELY CARMICHAEL.
THEY WANT A MARCH
IN WHICH BLACKS
WERE GONNA TAKE
A LEADERSHIP ROLE
IN WHICH THEY WILL NOT
ESCHEW NONVIOLENCE.
IN WHICH THERE SHOULD
BE ARMED SELF-DEFENSE.
WHITNEY YOUNG AND ROY WILKINS
CAN'T SIGN ON TO THIS.
James Meredith: BUT
THE OTHER QUESTION.
"COULD STOKELY CARMICHAEL
USE BLACK POWER?"
AND I SAID STOKELY
CARMICHAEL IS A CITIZEN
HE CAN SAY ANYTHING
HE WANNA SAY.
Dr. King: THIS MARCH. THAT
WE ARE CONTINUING
STARTED BY JAMES MEREDITH.
I AM CONVINCED
WILL HAVE AS GREAT
AN IMPACT OR PROBABLY
A GREATER IMPACT
THAN THE MARCH FROM
SELMA TO MONTGOMERY.
Narrator: WITHIN
DAYS. HIS LONE WALK
HAS TRANSFORMED INTO
A NATIONAL EVENT.
♪ WE SHALL OVERCOME
Announcer: ALONG THE WAY.
FIELD HANDS AND DOMESTIC WORKERS
JOINED THE MARCH AS
IT PASSED THEIR HOMES.
♪ WE SHALL OVERCOME
Narrator: ON JUNE 16TH.
THE MARCHERS ARRIVE
AT GREENWOOD.
ABOUT 100 MILES FROM JACKSON.
Reporter: AT GREENWOOD.
CITY OFFICIALS FIRST BALKED
AT GRANTING A CAMPSITE.
THEN DECIDED TO BE HELPFUL.
Narrator: AFTER
SOME NEGOTIATION.
THE MARCHERS ARE ABLE
TO CAMP ON PUBLIC LAND
BUT FRUSTRATION
IS NOW AT A PEAK.
Reporter: STOKELY CARMICHAEL
SPOKE LOUDER AND LOUDER.
HE SOUNDED THE MARCH'S NEW
RALLYING CALL. BLACK POWER.
Carmichael: WE WANT BLACK POWER.
WE WANT BLACK POWER.
Williams: BLACK POWER DIDN'T
JUST APPEAR IN 1966.
IT HAD ALWAYS BEEN THERE.
IT WAS ABOUT BLACK EMPOWERMENT.
IT WAS ABOUT BLACK PRIDE.
BUILDING UP ECONOMIC
SELF-SUFFICIENCY
IN THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN COMMUNITY.
Narrator: A FEW DAYS LATER.
3.500 MARCHERS
ARRIVE IN CANTON
THIS TIME OFFICIALS REFUSE TO
ALLOW CAMPING ON PUBLIC LAND.
Dr. King: THIS IS IMPORTANT.
WE'RE GOING TO STICK TOGETHER.
IF NECESSARY. WE ARE
WILLING TO FILL UP
ALL OF THE JAILS IN THE
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI.
Narrator: WHEN
STATE TROOPERS ARRIVE.
THE MARCHERS HAVE NO ESCAPE.
MEN. WOMEN. AND CHILDREN
ARE GASSED AND BEATEN.
BUT THEY REMAIN
UNAFRAID AND UNDETERRED.
Narrator: BY JUNE 26TH 1966.
MEREDITH'S LONE WALK
ACROSS MISSISSIPPI
HAS BECOME A MARCH OF MAGNITUDE.
Reporter: 20 DAYS
AFTER HE WAS WOUNDED.
MEREDITH REJOINED THE MARCH
AS IT APPROACHED JACKSON.
Narrator: THE FOLLOWING DAY.
THE MARCHERS ARRIVE AT
THEIR FINAL DESTINATION.
MISSISSIPPI'S STATE
CAPITOL IN JACKSON.
Man: ♪ I'M GONNA LET IT SHINE
James Meredith: THE PURPOSE
OF THE MARCH THAT
I STARTED THREE WEEKS AGO TODAY.
WHY I STOOD STRAIGHT
UP AND TO CHALLENGE
THAT THING AT THE BASE OF THE
SYSTEM OF WHITE SUPREMACY.
AND THAT THING IS FEAR.
Narrator: ALONG THE WAY.
4.000 BLACK MISSISSIPPIANS
HAVE REGISTERED TO VOTE.
Williams: THE MEREDITH MARCH
IS GOING TO HAVE
A VERY IMPORTANT
IMPACT IN MISSISSIPPI
IN TERMS OF EMPOWERING PEOPLE
TO SEE THE POSSIBILITY
OF BEING ABLE
TO GO TO REGISTER TO VOTE.
Narrator: TODAY
PROPORTIONATELY
MORE BLACKS THAN WHITES
ARE REGISTERED TO
VOTE IN MISSISSIPPI.
THE VOTER TURNOUT AMONGST
BLACKS WITHIN THE STATE
HAS BEEN BEYOND THAT
OF AFRICAN AMERICANS
OUTSIDE THE SOUTH FOR DECADES.
James Meredith: BUT THE VOTE IS
NOT FOR THE VOTING.
THE VOTE IS FOR GETTING WHAT
YOU NEED FOR THE PEOPLE.
AND WE AIN'T EVEN THERE YET.
Doyle: MEREDITH TRIGGERS.
THROUGH HIS OWN COURAGE
AND HIS OWN TAKING A
BULLET FOR THE CAUSE.
HE TRIGGERS THE LAST GREAT
MARCH OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ERA.
Narrator: IN THE
YEARS AFTER 1966.
JAMES MEREDITH CONTINUES TO
FORGE HIS OWN UNIQUE PATH.
NOW BASED IN NEW YORK.
HE BECOMES THE
REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE
AND CHALLENGES POPULAR
INCUMBENT ADAM CLAYTON POWELL
FOR A SEAT IN CONGRESS.
BY THE 1970S. HE TURNS
HIS FOCUS TO WALL STREET.
James Meredith: SINCE I LEFT
MISSISSIPPI SEVEN YEARS AGO.
I'VE SPENT ALMOST ALL
OF MY TIME IN NEW YORK
STUDYING HOW THE CAPITALIST
ECONOMIC SYSTEM WORKS
AND ABOUT THE ACCUMULATION
AND RETAINING OF WEALTH.
BUT THIS HAS NOT REACHED
BLACKS. EVERYONE AGREES WITH ME.
Narrator: HIS
DECISIONS IN LATER LIFE
HAVE SOMETIMES BEEN UNEXPECTED.
IN 1989. HE JOINS THE STAFF
OF SENATOR JESSE HELMS.
AN ARCH CONSERVATIVE
WHO CONSISTENTLY
OPPOSED CIVIL
RIGHTS LEGISLATION.
Doyle: JAMES MEREDITH WENT
TO WORK FOR JESSE HELMS.
THE FORMER ARCH SEGREGATIONIST
OF THE UNITED STATES SENATE.
AT THE TIME. JESSE HELMS
HAD RENOUNCED SEGREGATION
AS A LEGAL DOMINANT THEORY IN
AMERICA. HE HAD REJECTED IT.
Narrator: AND IN 1991.
HE ENDORSES DAVID DUKE.
FORMER KKK LEADER FOR
GOVERNOR OF LOUISIANA.
James Meredith: I ALWAYS
THOUGHT MY JOB WAS
TO CONVERT BAD WHITE FOLKS
INTO GOOD WHITE FOLKS.
I CONSIDER ONE OF MY MOST
SIGNIFICANT VICTORIES
CONVERTING DAVID DUKE FROM A
KLANSMAN TO A FORMER KLANSMAN.
Doyle: DUKE. AT THE TIME.
HAD RENOUNCED THE KLAN.
JAMES MEREDITH THOUGHT
DUKE WAS A FORMER RACIST.
NOW. I THINK HE WAS
PROBABLY WRONG THERE.
Narrator: MEREDITH
REMAINS A FREE THINKING
CHALLENGER TO THE STATUS QUO.
NOT AFRAID TO SIDE
WITH A PERCEIVED ENEMY
IN ORDER TO OPEN UP
AND FACE A DEBATE.
43 YEARS AFTER HE GRADUATED.
OLE MISS ERECTED A STATUE
TO HONOR JAMES MEREDITH.
Kellum: SOME OF OUR
STUDENTS CAME TOGETHER
TO DISCUSS WHAT COULD
THE UNIVERSITY DO
AND THEY ALL FELT WE SHOULD
HAVE A CIVIL RIGHTS MONUMENT.
Lewis: BECAUSE OF INDIVIDUALS
LIKE JAMES MEREDITH.
Kellum: WE WANTED THE
MONUMENT LOCATED BETWEEN
THE LYCEUM THAT
REJECTED MR. MEREDITH
AND THE LIBRARY THAT
WAS MR. MEREDITH'S
OPPORTUNITY TO GAIN KNOWLEDGE.
OH. MY FAVORITE
PART OF THIS WAS.
I LOOKED OUT ONE DAY AND
THERE WAS A LITTLE CHILD.
PROBABLY SEVEN OR EIGHT.
WHO WAS ON A SCHOOL TOUR.
WHO WAS HOLDING MR.
MEREDITH'S STATUE'S HAND
AND I MUST TELL YOU.
I HAD TEARS THAT DAY.
Narrator: OLE MISS HAS
MADE PROGRESS SINCE 1962.
Barnett: I LOVE MISSISSIPPI.
Narrator: IN JULY
2018. AT THE AGE OF 85.
JAMES IS INDUCTED INTO THE
OLE MISS ALUMNI HALL OF FAME.
Judy Meredith: THEY PUT JAMES
ON THE 50-YARD LINE.
THE WHOLE STADIUM STOOD
UP AND JUST APPLAUDED.
Speaker: MR.
JAMES MEREDITH.
[CROWD CHEERING]
Judy Meredith: THAT IS A HECK
OF AN ACCOMPLISHMENT
FOR MISSISSIPPI
AND I HOPE IT CONTINUES
TO GO IN THAT DIRECTION.
Narrator: MEREDITH
REMAINS COMMITTED
TO THE FIGHT HE
STARTED IN MISSISSIPPI
MORE THAN 50 YEARS AGO.
James Meredith: WE'VE GOT
TO HAVE A NEW AGENDA
IF BLACKS ARE EVER TO BECOME
FULL CITIZENS IN THIS COUNTRY
AND ENJOY ALL OF THE
RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
Gilliam: THE LEGACY
OF KNOWING THAT.
AS A BLACK PERSON IN AMERICA.
THERE ARE CHANCES
YOU ARE GONNA HAVE
TO TAKE IN ORDER TO
BRING ABOUT CHANGE.
Williams: THE CLASSIC
INDIVIDUAL WHO BELIEVES
IT'S THEIR RESPONSIBILITY
TO INTERROGATE
AND CONSTANTLY
PUSH THE BOUNDARIES
OF OUR DEMOCRACY
TO MAKE IT BETTER.
Judy Meredith: NOT CARING
ABOUT WHAT ANYBODY
ELSE THINKS ABOUT HIM. I
THINK THAT'S HIS LEGACY.
Narrator: ULTIMATELY.
HE FORCES US TO CONFRONT
ONE SIMPLE BUT PROFOUNDLY
POWERFUL QUESTION.
James Meredith: AM I A CITIZEN
OR AM I NOT A CITIZEN?